docs: navigation interrupts after streaming has started (notFound, forbidden, unauthorized) (#95851)
vercel/next.js: docs/01-app/03-api-reference/04-functions/not-found.mdx

}
```

## Good to know

> - `notFound()` does not require `return notFound()`, because of its TypeScript [`never`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/functions.html#never) return type.

Reviewer: I've always felt that this is backwards, let's correct it:

```suggestion
## Good to know

You do not need to write `return notFound()`. Calling it is enough, because it throws an exception that stops function execution. TypeScript understands this from its [`never`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/functions.html#never) return type, so a value you check first stays narrowed afterward:

```tsx
// fetchUser resolves to a user object, or undefined
const user = await fetchUser(id)

if (!user) {
  notFound()
}

// user is defined here
return <Profile user={user} />
```

Like any exception, it travels up the call stack until something catches it. A `try/catch` around the call swallows it, and the not-found UI won't render. If you need to catch errors near the call, use [`unstable_rethrow`](/docs/app/api-reference/functions/unstable_rethrow) to let the interrupt through first.
```

## Examples

### Calling `notFound()` after streaming has started

To keep a page's shell and loading UI visible while data loads, do the existence check inside a component wrapped in [`<Suspense>`](https://react.dev/reference/react/Suspense) instead of blocking the whole route. The idiomatic place for the check is the data-access function itself, awaited by the component that needs the data:

```tsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.tsx" switcher highlight={8}
import { Suspense } from 'react'

> import Link from 'next/link'
> import { notFound } from 'next/navigation'
> 
> async function getPost(slug: string) {
>   const res = await fetch(`https://api.example.com/posts/${slug}`)
>   if (!res.ok) {
>     notFound()
>   }
>   return res.json()
> }

Reviewer: Should we be more formal here 

````suggestion
async function getPost(slug: string) {
  const res = await fetch(`https://api.example.com/posts/${slug}`)
  if (res.status === 404) {
    notFound()
  }
  if (!res.ok) {
    throw new Error(`Failed to load post: ${res.status}`)
  }
  return res.json()
}
````

Just thinking that, the !res.ok would have to be catched by an error.tsx UI - too much detail maybe

async function Article({ slug }: { slug: string }) {
  const post = await getPost(slug)
  return (
    <article>
      <h1>{post.title}</h1>
      <p>{post.content}</p>
    </article>
  )
}

export default async function PostPage({
  params,
}: {

>   params: Promise<{ slug: string }>

Reviewer: `PageProps`

}) {
  const { slug } = await params

  return (
    <section>
      <Link href="/blog">Blog</Link>
      <Suspense fallback={<p>Loading...</p>}>
        <Article slug={slug} />
      </Suspense>
    </section>
  )
}
```

```jsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/page.js" switcher highlight={8}
import { Suspense } from 'react'
import Link from 'next/link'
import { notFound } from 'next/navigation'

async function getPost(slug) {
  const res = await fetch(`https://api.example.com/posts/${slug}`)
  if (!res.ok) {
    notFound()
  }
  return res.json()
}

async function Article({ slug }) {
  const post = await getPost(slug)
  return (
    <article>
      <h1>{post.title}</h1>
      <p>{post.content}</p>
    </article>
  )
}

export default async function PostPage({ params }) {
  const { slug } = await params

  return (
    <section>
      <Link href="/blog">Blog</Link>
      <Suspense fallback={<p>Loading...</p>}>
        <Article slug={slug} />
      </Suspense>
    </section>
  )
}
```

> Because `notFound()` is thrown during rendering, it propagates up to the nearest [`not-found`](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/not-found) boundary and replaces the UI, even after the shell has started streaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the post doesn't exist, `getPost` calls `notFound()`, which throws. Because this happens during rendering, the exception propagates to the nearest [`not-found`](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/not-found) boundary, which renders in place of the streamed-in content, even though the page shell has already been sent.
```

> Add a `not-found.tsx` alongside the route to define that UI:

Reviewer: Otherwise, the default `/_not_found` is used right? Not sure we should say it that way, but that's the behavior IIRC.

  return (
    <section>
      <h1>Post not found</h1>
      <p>The post you're looking for doesn't exist.</p>
    </section>
  )
}
```

```jsx filename="app/blog/[slug]/not-found.js" switcher
export default function NotFound() {
  return (
    <section>
      <h1>Post not found</h1>
      <p>The post you're looking for doesn't exist.</p>
    </section>
  )
}
```

The trade-off is the HTTP status code. Because the check fires inside the `<Suspense>` boundary, the response has already begun streaming as a `200`, and the status can't change once streaming has started. The `noindex` tag keeps a soft 404 out of search results; if you also need the response itself to carry a `404`, the check has to resolve before anything streams. See [Status codes](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/loading#status-codes).

### Serving a 404 from a Route Handler

`notFound()` also works in a [Route Handler](/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route), where it serves a `404` to the caller.

```tsx filename="app/api/posts/[slug]/route.ts" switcher
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'
import { notFound } from 'next/navigation'

export async function GET(
  request: Request,

>   { params }: { params: Promise<{ slug: string }> }

Reviewer: `RouteContext` - https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route#route-context-helper
